.TH PRISMAFS 1 "July 2026" "PrismaFS 1.2.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
prismafs \- lightweight, layered filesystem 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B prismafs
[\-c \fIconfig\fR] [\-v | \-h] <mountpoint>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B PrismaFS
is a lightweight, layered filesystem. It allows users to overlay base filesystems with session-specific layers for experimentation, isolation, and flexibility.

This utility mounts PrismaFS at the specified
.I mountpoint
, using directories defined either by a config file (recommended) or by the environment variables
.I SESSION_LAYER_DIR
and
.I BASE_LAYER_DIRS.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c \fIconfig\fR
Load layer configuration from
.I config
instead of environment variables. See
.B CONFIG FILE
below.
.TP
.B \-v
Displays the current version of PrismaFS and exits.
.TP
.B \-h
Displays this help message and exits.

.SH CONFIG FILE
A plain-text file with one directive per line. Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments. Empty lines are ignored.
.TP
.B session \fI<path>\fR
Directory used for session-specific writes (required once).
.TP
.B base \fI<path>\fR
A base layer directory (required at least once). Multiple
.B base
lines are listed in priority order.

Example config file:
.nf
    # my analysis environment
    session /tmp/session
    base /opt/project-base
    base /usr/local/share/common
.fi

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
Used when no
.B \-c
flag provided (fallback).
.TP
.B SESSION_LAYER_DIR
Defines the directory used for session-specific layers.
.TP
.B BASE_LAYER_DIRS
Comma-separated list of base directories to use as layers.

.SH EXAMPLES
Mount using config file:
.nf
    prismafs -c ~/.config/prismafs/dev.conf /tmp/prismafs_mount
.fi

Mount with environment variables:
.nf
    export SESSION_LAYER_DIR=/tmp/session
    export BASE_LAYER_DIRS=/tmp/base1
    prismafs /tmp/prismafs_mount
.fi

Mount with multiple base layers via environment:
.nf
    export SESSION_LAYER_DIR=/tmp/session
    export BASE_LAYER_DIRS="/tmp/base1,/tmp/base2"
    prismafs /tmp/prismafs_mount
.fi

Display the PrismaFS version:
.nf
    prismafs -v
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
Goran Bunic
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2026. Released under the Apache License 2.0.
